Each of the trillions of cells
that make up the human body
contain 23 pairs of structures
called chromosomes.
A chromosome is made up of a coil,
or double helix of DNA.
The DNA provides a complete
set of instructions for how our
bodies should develop and function.
There are also short sets or instructions
within the DNA called genes.
The mother and father each provide
half of the complete set of genes
a baby is born with.
The genes provide instructions for over
200 different types of cells.
A cell needs to know which
short set of instructions to follow
and which of the parents’ genes will be
active or expressed.
Sometimes the mother’s,
sometimes the father’s,
sometimes both,
and sometimes neither parental gene is active.
Chemical and molecular processes
determine which genes are expressed
by tagging them for certain functions.
Tagging loosens the coil of DNA,
which is normally wound tightly around
spools of proteins called histones,
and would be 40,000 times
longer, if unwound.
Loosening or slightly unwinding the coil
makes the genes accessible
so they can make proteins required for the structure,
function, and regulation of tissues and organs.
Through tagging, genes can be turned on and off,
which permits fast adaptation
to changes in the environment.
During pregnancy, the mother’s actions
and the environment can influence
where the tags go
and which genes will be expressed
which can affect the health
of the developing baby.
Some changes continue throughout life
and can be passed down from
one generation to the next.